---
title: 'Dr. Dean Mathias'
author: Philip Nelson
date: 6th November 2019
---

Dr. Mathias's major research areas are Distributed Systems, Computer Graphics, and Technical Game Development.

Dr. Mathias's doesn't have a research group but he discussed his master's thesis on Peer-to-Peer Simulation of Massive Virtual Environments. I liked his discussion of his research. I found the problem that he chose to solve very interesting and deletable. I really liked how one of his goals was to lower the barrier to entry for massively multilayer games (MMO) and make their development open to larger groups of people, especially those without access to large computing resources that are traditionally needed to host such games.

Two researchers in the filed of Game Development and Computer Graphics are Jonathan Blow and Dr. Jan Bender at RWTH Aachen University.

Jonathan Blow published a paper entitled "Game Development, Harder Than You Think" [http://faculty.salisbury.edu/~xswang/Research/papers/game/queuefeb04/blow.pdf](http://faculty.salisbury.edu/~xswang/Research/papers/game/queuefeb04/blow.pdf). In this paper, Jonathan talks about the difficulty in game development. He starts off by saying the hardest part of making a game has always been the engineering. In the past, game engineering was mainly about low-level optimization, writing code that would run quickly on the target computer, and leveraging clever little tricks whenever possible. The early games were extremely resource limited so developers had to exploit every last bit to make games. But in the past ten years, games have ballooned in complexity. Now the primary technical challenge is simply getting the code to work to produce an end result that bears some semblance to the desired functionality. Jonathan says that to the extent that we optimize, we are usually concerned with high-level algorithmic choices. There is such a wide variety of algorithms to know about, so much experience required to implement them in a useful way, and so much work overall that just needs to be done, that we have a perpetual shortage of qualified people in the industry. Jonathan states that making a game today is a very different experience than it was even in 1994. He believes that it is more difficult. In order to talk about specifics, he classified the difficulties into two categories: problems due to overall project size and complexity and problems due to highly domain-specific requirements. Though this helps introduce the situation in stages, the distinction between the two categories is a bit artificial; he comes full-circle at the end, seeing that there are fundamental domain-specific reasons (problems due to highly domain-specific requirements) why we should expect that games are among the most complicated kinds of software we should expect to see (problems due to overall project size), and why we should not expect this to change for the foreseeable future.

Jonathan Blow published a paper entitled "Terrain Rendering at High Levels of Detail " [http://number-none.com/blow/papers/terrain_rendering.pdf](http://number-none.com/blow/papers/terrain_rendering.pdf). In this paper, Jonathan discusses lessons he learned while implementing a terrain renderer that processes geometry and textures at high levels of detail. He found he needed to extend existing terrain algorithms and develop new techniques. His paper is divided into two parts. The first part is a detailed disclosure of a subsystem he has developed for handling high levels of texture detail in a scalable way. The second part is a series of less-formal notes that describe the content of the lecture; these notes discuss work that is more recent, and they take a wider survey of the terrain rendering situation.

When rendering terrains that utilize high resolution texture maps, Jonathan explains that texture memory management can quickly become the performance bottleneck. He presents a system that computes a small working set of texture maps for each frame to be rendered. Utilizing frame coherence and a simple recurrence relation, the algorithm computes the texture resolutions necessary to render the scene, requiring only a few arithmetic operations per polygon. 

Dr. Jan Bender published a paper entitled "Position-Based Simulation Methods in Computer Graphics" [https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Jan_Bender/publication/274940214_Position-Based_Simulation_Methods_in_Computer_Graphics/links/552cc4a40cf29b22c9c466df/Position-Based-Simulation-Methods-in-Computer-Graphics.pdf](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Jan_Bender/publication/274940214_Position-Based_Simulation_Methods_in_Computer_Graphics/links/552cc4a40cf29b22c9c466df/Position-Based-Simulation-Methods-in-Computer-Graphics.pdf). In this paper, Dr. Bender discusses position-based simulations methods in computer graphics. He discusses the physically-based simulation of mechanical effects and how it has been an important research topic in computer graphics for more than two decades. Classical methods in this field discretize Newton’s second law and determine different forces to simulate various effects like stretching, shearing, and bending of deformable bodies or pressure and viscosity of fluids. Given these forces, velocities and finally positions are determined by a numerical integration of the resulting accelerations. Dr. Bender states that in the last years, position-based simulation methods have become popular in the graphics community. In contrast to classical simulation approaches these methods compute the position changes in each simulation step directly, based on the solution of a quasi-static problem. Therefore, position-based approaches are fast, stable and controllable which make them well-suited for use in interactive environments. However, these methods are generally not as accurate as force-based methods but still provide visual plausibility. Hence, the main application areas of position-based simulation are virtual reality, computer games and special effects in movies and commercials. In this paper, Dr. Bender first introduces the basic concept of position-based dynamics. Then we presents different solvers and compares them with the classical implicit Euler method. He discusses approaches to improve the convergence of these solvers. Moreover, he shows how position-based methods are applied to simulate hair, cloth, volumetric deformable bodies, rigid body systems and fluids. He also demonstrates how complex effects like anisotropy or plasticity can be simulated and introduce approaches to improve the performance. Finally, he gives an outlook and discusses open problems.

Dr. Jan Bender published a paper entitled "Interactive Simulation of Rigid Body Dynamics in Computer Graphics" [https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/cgf.12272](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/cgf.12272). In this paper, Dr. Bender discusses interactive simulations of rigid body dynamics in computer graphics. Interactive rigid body simulation is an important part of many modern computer tools, which no authoring tool nor game engine can do without. Such high‐performance computer tools open up new possibilities for changing how designers, engineers, modelers and animators work with their design problems. This paper is a report on the physics, the models, the numerical methods and the algorithms used in interactive rigid body simulation all of which have evolved and matured over the past 20 years. Furthermore, the paper communicates the mathematical and theoretical details in a pedagogical manner. This paper is not only a report on what has been done, it also seeks to give deeper insights to help guide future research. Rigid body dynamics simulation is an integral and important part of many modern computer tools in a wide range of application areas such as computer games, animation software for digital production, including special effects in film and animation movies, robotics validation, virtual prototyping and training simulators. In this paper, Dr. Bender focuses on interactive rigid body dynamics simulation, a subfield that has evolved rapidly over the past 10 years and moved the frontier of run‐time simulation to applications in areas where, until recently, only off‐line simulation was possible. As a consequence, this changes the computer tools humans use and has great economical impact on society as a whole.
