---
title: 'Dr. Doug Galarus'
author: Philip Nelson
date: 16th October 2019
---

Dr. Galarus' major research areas are spatial-temporal data quality, application of data science to intelligent transportation systems.

Dr. Galarus' research group has been working on the following projects:

* Automated Safety Warning System Controller
* Weather Share
* One-Stop-Shop

I wasn't particularly interested in Dr. Galarus' projects. I do however, believe that his projects have had a positive impact on travel safety and are doing good work.

Two researchers in the filed of data science are Dr. Foster Provost at New York University and Dr. Roderick Joseph Little at University of Michigan.

Dr. Provost published a paper entitled "Data Science and its Relationship to Big Data and Data-Driven Decision Making" [https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/full/10.1089/big.2013.1508](https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/full/10.1089/big.2013.1508). In this paper, Dr. Provost discusses data science and it's relationship to big data and data driven decision making. He begins by saying that compaines have realized they need to hire data scientists, academic institutions are scrambling to put together data-science programs, and publications are touting data science as a hot-even “sexy”-career choice. Dr. Provost describes data science as an emerging field. However, he says that there is confusion about what exactly data science is, and this confusion could lead to disillusionment as the concept diffuses into meaningless buzzwords. Dr. Provost argues that there are good reasons why data science has been hard to pin down exactly what is means. One reason is that data science is intricately intertwined with other important concepts also of growing importance, such as big data and data-driven decision making. Another reason is the natural tendency to associate what a practitioner does with the definition of the practitioner's field; this can result in overlooking the fundamentals of the field. Dr. Provost et al. believe that trying to define the boundaries of data science precisely is not of the utmost importance. Debates will be had about the boundaries of the field in an academic setting, but in order for data science to serve business effectively, it is important to understand its relationships to other important related concepts, and to begin to identify the fundamental principles underlying data science. Once the fundamental princiapals are embraced, we can much better understand and explain exactly what data science has to offer Dr. Provost asserts. Furthermore, only once we embrace the underlying values should we be comfortable calling it data science. In this article, Dr. Provost presents a perspective that addresses all these concepts. He closes by offering, as examples, a partial list of fundamental principles underlying data science.

Dr. Provost published a paper entitled "Societal Impact of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence" [https://www.researchgate.net/profile/James_Hodson7/publication/326502113_Societal_Impact_of_Data_Science_and_Artificial_Intelligence/links/5b90174ba6fdcce8a4c2f1eb/Societal-Impact-of-Data-Science-and-Artificial-Intelligence.pdf](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/James_Hodson7/publication/326502113_Societal_Impact_of_Data_Science_and_Artificial_Intelligence/links/5b90174ba6fdcce8a4c2f1eb/Societal-Impact-of-Data-Science-and-Artificial-Intelligence.pdf). In this paper Dr. Provost discusses the societal impacts of data science and artificial intelligence. He begins by discussing he explosion of interest in KDD and other data science/machine learning/AI conferences as just one of the many signs that these technologies are no longer confined to the realms of academia and a hand-full of tech companies. As our daily lives seamlessly integrate more and more data-driven applications, people’s excitement is tempered by worry about the technologies’ potential to disrupt their existence. Having worked for almost 30 years to design and develop these technologies, the KDD community now should examine and debate the impact of machine learning & AI on the broader world. Beyond the hype and the buzzwords, where do we stand with respect to the dangers? Dr. Provost wants to discuss what role can the community can play to alleviate concerns around AI taking jobs, or taking over. He wants to know how can the value derived from data be distributed fairly? Are concerns about inequity well-founded or rather largely problems of perception? What can be done to bring data hunger and data sharing concerns to a level of equilibrium? How do we prepare people to interact with intelligent systems at scale? Can we unleash the incredible responsiveness of the KDD community toward longer-term more impactful projects across sectors that are essential for social good, such as Health, Environmental Sustainability, and Public Welfare. Dr. Provost is concerned about how these technologies will impact our society and I agree that these discussions need to be had.

Dr. Little published a paper entitled "The Analysis of Social Science Data with Missing Values" [https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0049124189018002004](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0049124189018002004). In this paper, Dr. Little discusses the analysis of social science data with missing values. First, the methods for handling missing data in social science data sets are reviewed by Dr. Little. Then the limitations of common practical approaches, including complete-case analysis, available-case analysis and imputation, are illustrated on a simple missing-data problem with one complete and one incomplete variable. Then Dr. Little explores two more principled approaches, namely maximum likelihood under a model for the data and missing-data mechanism and multiple imputation, are applied to the bivariate problem. Dr. Little outlines the general properties of these methods, and applications to more complex missing-data problems are discussed. The EM algorithm, which is a convenient method for computing maximum likelihood estimates in missing-data problems, is described and applied to two common models, the multivariate normal model for continuous data and the multinomial model for discrete data. Multiple imputation under explicit or implicit models is recommended as a method that retains the advantages of imputation and overcomes its limitations.

Dr. Little published a paper entitled "The Prevention and Treatment of Missing Data in Clinical Trials" [https://www.nejm.org/doi/pdf/10.1056/nejmsr1203730](https://www.nejm.org/doi/pdf/10.1056/nejmsr1203730). In this paper, Dr. Little discusses the prevention and treatment of missing data in clinical trials. He begins by stating the severity of missing data in clinical trials. Missing data has compromised inferences from clinical trials, yet the topic has received little attention in the clinical-trial community. Existing regulatory guidances on the design, conduct, and analysis of clinical trials have little specific advice on how to address the problem of missing data. A recent National Research Council (NRC) report on the topic seeks to address this gap, and this article summarizes some of the main findings and recommendations of that report. Dr. Little  and the other authors of the article served on the panel that prepared the report. Dr. Little outlines six principles for drawing inferences from incomplete data that are applicable in a wide variety of settings.
First, determine if possible whether the values that are missing are meaningful for analysis. Second, formulate an appropriate and well defined causal primary measure of treatment effect.Third, as much as possible, document the reasons why data are missing. Fourth, decide on a primary set of assumptions about the missing-data mechanism. Fifth, conduct a statistically valid analysis under the primary missing-data assumptions. And sixth, assess the robustness of inferences about treatment effects to various missing-data assumptions by conducting a sensitivity analysis that relates inferences to one or more parameters that capture departures from the primary missing data assumption, such as the pattern-mixture analysis outlined above. In summary, Dr. Little says there is no easy fix for missing data at the analysis stage.
