---
title: 'Erik Falor'
author: Philip Nelson
date: 18th September 2019
---

Erik Falor does not do research; however, his interests in computer science are 

* cyber security
* software design

Erik is also interested in computer science history. He says that we have an interesting opportunity because our field is so relatively young, yet developed, we are in the golden age of CS! We should know our history to avoid reinventing the wheel. Erik's favorite facet of computer science is elegant design and understanding the cost of complexity. 

Erik recommended two papers entitled "Reflections on trusting trust" [https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=358198.358210](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=358198.358210) and "This World of Ours" [http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/mickens/files/thisworldofours.pdf](http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/mickens/files/thisworldofours.pdf). Considering the research ideas from these two papers as Mr. Falor's research areas, I enjoyed both papers more than any other paper I have yet read. I enjoyed the philosophical debates that were presented and enjoyed the presentation of these serious topics. Two researchers in the field of security are Dr. Dan Boneh at Stanford University and Dr. Martin Georgiev at University of Texas at Austin.

Dr. Boneh published a paper entitled "How Relevant is the Turing Test in the Age of Sophisbots?" [https://arxiv.org/pdf/1909.00056.pdf](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1909.00056.pdf). In Dr. Boneh's first paper, he discuses some of the implications in security that are brought about by the advancement of machines that are encroaching on passing the Turing Test. For context, the Turing Test is a test developed by Alan Turing in 1950 to test a machine's ability to exhibit intelligent behavior equivalent to, or indistinguishable from, a human. Turing proposed that a human evaluator would judge natural language conversations between a human and a machine designed to generate human-like responses. The evaluator would be aware that one of the two partners in conversation is a machine, and all participants would be separated from one another. The test results do not depend on the machine's ability to give correct answers to questions, only how closely its answers resemble those a human would give. Dr. Boneh cites projects in machine learning such as Google Duplex and Deep Fake that are able to produce human like speech or physical representation that is near identical to that produced by a human being. Dr. Boneh comments on the security implications associated with social engineering and the mass distribution of fake news through social media. As machines get better and better at producing human like content, there is the increasing possibility that these machines will be used for malicious intentions. He identifies multiple routes of defense against synthetically generated content such as detecting artifacts of synthetic content, content provenance, and total accountability. Ultimately these measures have their shortcomings and Dr. Boneh believes that the key is in developing public policy, legal, and normative frameworks for managing the malicious applications of technology in conjunction with efforts to refine it.

Dr. Boneh published a paper entitled "PowerSpy: Location Tracking using Mobile Device Power Analysis" [https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/usenixsecurity15/sec15-paper-michalevsky.pdf](https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/usenixsecurity15/sec15-paper-michalevsky.pdf). In his paper, Dr. Boneh discusses the possibility of tracking a phone user's location with nothing more that the battery consumption. The battery consumption is usually considered harmless therefore reading it requires no special permission. However, Dr. Boneh and his team were successfully in training a machine learning algorithm to infer the phone's location. They leveraged the fact that a phone's power consumption is significantly affected by the distance to the nearest cell tower and obstacles in between the phone and the tower. The closer a phone is to a cell tower and the fewer obstacles between them, the less power the phone consumes. With pre-measured data about power consumption, an attacker can infer a target's location. Dr. Boneh recommends using tighter permissions from the operating system in order to remove this threat.

Dr. Georgiev published a paper entitled "Rethinking Security of Web-Based System Applications" [https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2736277.2741663](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2736277.2741663). In this paper, Dr. Georgiev discusses the security risks involved with web-based system applications. These applications run outside the web browser and have direct access to native system objects such as files, camera, Geo location, etc. They showed that systems that allow web-based system applications are prone to unintended delegation of native-access rights. When applications request native access for their own code, they unintentionally enable it for untrusted third-party code, too. This enables malicious ads and other third party content to steal users’ OAuth authentication credentials, access camera on their devices, etc. In this paper, Dr. Georgiev describes a software called PowerGate which enables application developers to write native-object access policies with explicit principals such as application code vs third party code.

Dr. Georgiev published a paper entitled "The most dangerous code in the world: validating SSL certificates in non-browser software" [https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2382204](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2382204). In this paper, Dr. Georgiev discusses the security vulnerabilities associated with SSL. SSL (secure sockets layer) is the standard for secure communication on the Internet. The security of SSL connections depends on correctly validating a public-key certificate that is presented when the connection is established. Dr. Georgiev and his team were able to demonstrate that SSL certificate validation is completely broken in many libraries and applications where security is critical. The venerabilities include Amazon’s EC2 Java library and all cloud clients based on it; Amazon’s and PayPal’s merchant SDKs responsible for transmitting payment details from e-commerce sites to payment gateways; integrated shopping carts such as osCommerce, ZenCart, Ubercart, and PrestaShop; AdMob code used by mobile websites; Chase mobile banking and several other Android apps and libraries; Java Web-services middleware—including Apache Axis, Axis 2, Codehaus XFire, and Pusher library for Android—and all applications employing this middleware. The SSL connections formed on these platforms were insecure and venerable to man in the middle attacks. They discovered that the root cause of these venerabilities is poorly designed API's that mislead developers and ended up confusing them into validating SSL incorrectly.After discussing the specific failures in the aforementioned companies, the team's advice was to use fuzzing (black-box, if necessary) and adversarial testing to see how the application behaves when presented with abnormal SSL certificates, don’t modify application code and disable certificate validation for testing with self-signed and/or untrusted certificates, and don’t depend on the library’s defaults to set up the SSL connection securely.
