---
title: 'Dr. John Edwards'
author: Philip Nelson
date: 11th September 2019
---

Dr. Edwards' major research areas are simulation, missile simulation visualization, geometric modeling, and computer science education.

Dr. Edwards' research group is or has been working on the following projects:

* PhysX
* Splunk
* Generalized Voronoi Diagram
* Phanon

I found Dr. Edwards' research on PhysX, and Phanon to be very interesting. I think simulation of the real world very interesting and believe that better models of physical systems will lead to better solutions to the problems we face in science and engineering. I also found the Phanon project very interesting. I think that computer science and education in general has a lot of room to improve. As we educate more people, we will encounter more and more students who do not learn best from current teaching techniques. Therefore we need to discover new ways to teach that will make more students successful. I was not very interested in Splunk. I think data visualization is a fascinating topic. I think that it has many implications in research at large and in many other areas that deal with interpreting data. However, I was not interested in working on missile simulation visualization.

One researcher in the field of computer science education is Dr. Mordechai Ben-Ari at Weizmann Institute of Science. One researcher in the field of simulation is Dr. George H. Booth.

Dr. Ben-Ari published a paper entitled "From Scratch to 'Real' Programming" [https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2677087](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2677087). In this paper, Dr. Ben-Ari explores the question "to what extent can middle school students learn CS, and how does this affect their encounter with CS in secondary school?" This question is important to answer because it impacts the justification for teaching programming in middle school. The researchers found that students were able to recognize concepts such as variables, conditional execution and others before having them explained to them by teachers. They were able to connect these concepts from scratch. They also found that some concepts such as variable types and bounded loops were difficult at first for scratch students because of the way scratch makes use of untyped variables and forever loops; however, they rabidly learned to use typed variables and bounded loops showing that the restricted interpretations were not persistent. Some teachers reported shorter teaching times compared to previous pre-scratch years.

Dr. Ben-Ari published a paper entitled "Visualizing Programs with Jeliot 3" [https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=989928](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=989928). In this paper, Dr. Ben-Ari describes a program he helped develop called Jeliot 3. Jeliot 3 is designed to aid new computer science students in learning procedural and object oriented programming by visualizing the data and control flow in a program. The goal of Jeliot is to involve students in the construction of their programs while providing a visual representation of the program's execution. This will help students obtain a mental model of the program and help them learn new terminology that will help them discuss programming concepts. A major goal that Dr. Ben-Ari achieved while working on Jeliot 3 was to simplify the user interface so that it is better suited to novice programmers and he extended the previous versions to allow for the use of objects. He also improved the error reporting. He concludes that Jeliot is ready to be used by teachers and students.

Dr. Booth published a paper entitled "Fermion Monte Carlo without fixed nodes: A game of life, death, and annihilation in Slater determinant space" [https://aip.scitation.org/doi/full/10.1063/1.3193710](https://aip.scitation.org/doi/full/10.1063/1.3193710). In this paper, Dr. Booth describes a new method for the simulation of many-electron systems through the quantum Monte Carlo method. This new method is designed to simulate the underlying imaginary-time Schrodinger equation of the interacting Hamiltonian. The method uses a set of dynamic walkers which carry a positive and negative sign and evolve according to a set of rules which include spawning, death and annihilation. The quantum Monte Carlo method encompasses a large family of computational methods that aim to model complex quantum systems. A major goal of these methods is to solve the quantum many-body problem. Dr. Booth was able develop a new quantum Monte Carlo algorithm to simulate these problems in a system without any _a priori_ information as long as a critical number of walkers is exceeded for the system. The new simulation should help further the field of quantum chemistry.

Dr. Booth published a paper entitled "PySCF: the Python‐based simulations of chemistry framework" [https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/wcms.1340](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/wcms.1340). This paper is about building a python-based framework for chemistry simulations. The researchers built a general purpose platform designed from the ground up to emphasize simplicity while maintaining efficiency and performance. I think choosing python helped add to the simplicity of the framework and ease of use for new method development. They were able to leverage optimized C routines to maintain performance. The researchers chose to maintain a mostly functional, opposed to object oriented, approach to building their software in order to aid in ease of extension by future users. Building this package helped solve a big problem in quantum chemistry, the need to learn custom domain specific input languages for different software packages. In contrast, PySCF does not have an input language, the functionality is simply called from an input script written in the Python language.
