---
title: 'Dr. Mahdi Al-Ameen'
author: Philip Nelson
date: 13 November 2019
---

Dr. Mahdi Al-Ameen's major research areas are Usable Security and Privacy which is at the intersection of cyber security and online privacy and human computer interaction. Dr. Al-Ameen describes usable security as designing security that is secure, usable and sustainable.

Dr. Al-Ameen's research group has been working on the following projects:

* Why do users click on click-bait?
  * Identify and alert click posts
* Usable privacy for smart phones
  * build a lock screen to display which apps are collecting and sharing which data
* Primacy in facial recognition
* Primacy in and security in sensitive professions
  * Doctors etc.

I liked that Dr. Al-Ameen is working to secure social media platforms because I think that is where there is a lot of risk to be taken advantage of. Although I think Dr. Al-Ameen's research is important, I didn't like it that much. I don't find security an interesting topic for myself despite agreeing that it is a very important area of computer science.

Two researchers in the filed of security are Dr. Paul Dourish at University of California, Irvine and Dr. Volker Roth at Freie Universität Berlin.

Dr. Paul Dourish published a paper entitled "An approach to usable security based on event monitoring and visualization" [https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=844116](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=844116). The problem of usability has been recognized in the security community for many years, but has, so far, eluded systematic solution. In this paper, Dr. Dourish discusses an approach to usable security based on event monitoring and visualization. He characterizes the problem as a gap between theoretical and effective levels of security, and considers the characteristics of the problem. The approach he takes focuses on visibility,"how can we make relevant features of the security context apparent to users, in order to allow them to make informed decisions about their actions and the potential implications of those actions?"

In the paper, Dr. Dourish addresses networked computer systems. Since networked computer systems are increasingly the site of people's work and activity. Millions of ordinary citizens conduct commercial transactions over the Internet and manage their finances and pay their bills online. Companies increasingly use the Internet to connect different offices, or form virtual teams to tackle mission-critical problems through entirely "virtual" interaction. We see increasing discussion of online voting systems for political elections. These new online opportunities come with a cost. Although much effort has been devoted to the development of algorithms and technologies for secure communication and computation, much less time has been spent investigating how to integrate these techniques into real-world use in meaningful ways. In fact, it often seems that security and usability trade off against each other. In the paper, Dr. Dourish illustrates a research group designing a system for mobile code needed a security solution. A highly qualified academic security expert designed and implemented an elegant scheme based on SPKI/SDSI in which the system servers would determine transaction rights based on cryptographically secure certificates exchanged over an SSL RPC infrastructure. However this resulted in a performance reduction of 5-10X. As a result everyone simply turned it off, rendering the system less secure than it had been in the first place. He also talked about a research laboratory used S/Key one-time pads to allow terminal access through a firewall host. Researchers would periodically use private passwords and local client programs to generate themselves new one-time password pads. However, the system was soon discontinued when it became clear that people could not tell whether their connections were secure enough to make it safe to generate the new pads. Finally he addressed Norton's Anti-Virus software offers an option to check incoming email for viruses before you download it to your computer. When this option is turned on, the user's login and password are sent to a Norton server, which downloads the user's email and reads it, checking for viruses, before sending it on to the user. Users are shocked to learn that their password and their email are being shared with Norton; it damages their trust in the system and in the software. 

Dr. Paul Dourish published a paper entitled "Unpacking “Privacy” for a Networked World" [https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~jasonh/courses/ubicomp-sp2007/papers/06-palen-dourish.pdf](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~jasonh/courses/ubicomp-sp2007/papers/06-palen-dourish.pdf). In his paper, Dr. Dourish addresses unpacking privacy for a networked world. He states that although privacy is broadly recognized as a dominant concern for the development of interactive technologies, our ability to reason analytically about privacy in real settings is limited. A lack of conceptual interpretive frameworks makes it difficult to unpack interrelated privacy issues in settings where information technology is also present. He builds on a theory developed by social psychologist Irwin Altman and outlines a model of privacy as a dynamic, dialectic process. He discusses three tensions that govern interpersonal privacy management in everyday life, and use these to explore select technology case studies drawn from the research literature. Altman’s fundamental observation is that privacy regulation is neither static nor rule-based. We know that setting explicit parameters and then requiring people to live by them simply does not work, and yet this is often what information technology requires, from file systems to email filters to databases to cell phones. Instead, a fine and shifting line between privacy and publicity exists, and is dependent on social context, intention, and the fine-grained coordination between action and the disclosure of that action These suggest new ways for thinking about privacy in sociotechnical environments as a practical matter.

Dr. Volker Roth published a paper entitled "A PIN-entry method resilient against shoulder surfing" [https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1030116](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1030116). In this paper, Dr. Roth discusses a PIN-entry method resilient against shoulder surfing. He states that magnetic stripe cards are in common use for electronic payments and cash withdrawal. Reported incidents document that criminals easily pickpocket cards or skim them by swiping them through additional card readers. Personal identification numbers (PINs) are obtained by shoulder surfing, through the use of mirrors or concealed miniature cameras. Both elements, the PIN and the card, are generally sufficient to give the criminal full access to the victim’s account. In this paper, he presents alternative PIN entry methods to which his teams refers as cognitive trapdoor games. These methods make it significantly harder for a criminal to obtain PINs even if he fully observes the entire input and output of a PIN entry procedure. Dr. Roth also introduces the idea of probabilistic cognitive trapdoor games, which offer resilience to shoulder surfing even if the criminal records a PIN entry procedure with a camera. They studied the security as well as the usability of our methods.

Dr. Volker Roth published a paper entitled "Listen and Whisper: Security Mechanisms for BGP" [http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.136.8054&rep=rep1&type=pdf](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.136.8054&rep=rep1&type=pdf). In this paper, Dr. Roth discusses a method called "Listen and Whisper" which is a security mechanism for BGP. BGP, is the current inter-domain routing protocol, assumes that the routing information propagated by authenticated routers is correct. This assumption renders the current infrastructure vulnerable to both accidental misconfigurations and deliberate attacks. To reduce this vulnerability, Dr. Roth presents a combination of two mechanisms: Listen and Whisper. Listen passively probes the data plane and checks whether the underlying routes to different destinations work. Whisper uses cryptographic functions along with routing redundancy to detect bogus route advertisements in the control plane. These mechanisms are easily deployable, and do not rely on either a public key infrastructure or a central authority like ICANN.  The combination of Listen and Whisper eliminates a large number of problems due to router misconfigurations, and restricts the damage that deliberate attackers can cause. These mechanisms can detect and contain isolated adversaries that propagate even a few invalid route announcements. Colluding adversaries pose a more stringent challenge, and Dr. Roth proposes a simple change to the BGP policy mechanism to limit the damage colluding adversaries can cause. They demonstrate the utility of Listen and Whisper through real-world deployment, measurements and empirical analysis of their worst-case behaviors.
