---
title: 'Dr. Nick Flann'
author: Philip Nelson
date: 23rd October 2019
---

Dr. Flann's major research areas are machine learning and artificial intelligence.

Dr. Flann's research group has been working on the following projects:

* Artificial Intelligence
* Biological in Silico 
  * Cancer Research
* Clean Energy
  * power generation
  * climate change
  * technological improvement
    * solar placement
    * battery construction
    * electric vehicle route planning

I liked that Dr. Flann is using techniques in machine learning and artificial intelligence to solve issues related to global climate change. I also found his research in biological in silico to be interesting as well. It is incredible to see the areas that machine learning is able to apply to and the problems it is able to solve.

Two researchers in the filed of machine learning are Dr. Soteris Kalogirou at Cyprus University of Technology and Dr. Paras Mandal at University of Texas at El Paso.

Dr. Kalogirou published a paper entitled "Artificial Intelligence in Renewable Energy Systems Modelling and Prediction" [https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/03b8/41188867d4fdbaee5ccb056901f506dcf70e.pdf](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/03b8/41188867d4fdbaee5ccb056901f506dcf70e.pdf). In this paper, Dr. Kalogirou discusses the use of artificial intelligence in renewable energy systems modeling and predition. He begins by reminiscing on the possibility of developing a machine that would “think”, claiming that this has intrigued human beings since ancient times. Artificial intelligence (AI) systems comprise two major areas, expert systems (ES) and artificial neural networks (ANNs). The major objective in the paper are to illustrate how artificial intelligence techniques might play an important role in modelling and prediction of the performance of renewable energy systems. Dr. Kalogirou outlines an understanding of how expert systems and neural networks operate by way of presenting a number of problems in the different disciplines of renewable energy engineering. The various applications of expert systems and neural networks are presented in a thematic rather than a chronological or any other order. Results presented in this paper, are testimony to the potential of artificial intelligence as a design tool in many areas of renewable energy engineering.

Dr. Kalogirou published a paper entitled "Implementing artificial neural networks in energy building applications" [https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8398847](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8398847). In this paper, Dr. Kalogirou disucsses implementing artificial neural networks in energy building applications. He begins by disucssing the origins of neural netowrks by stating the main idea of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) came up from the prototype Mcculloch and Pitts model first published in 1943. Their study first introduced mathematical models of neurological networks, based on threshold functions. As a result, the calculation of any logic or arithmetic function was made possible. Soon after, researchers proposed different ANN models, each designed for specific applications, resulting to the variety of different ANN types. Nevertheless, the common share between the different ANNs is the calculation of either an arithmetic or a logic value, based on some criteria. Due to their proven performance and efficiency, ANNs are also highly used in the energy sector for applications such as prediction and control. As the building sector corresponds to a large amount of primary energy consumption. The goal of Dr. Kalogirou's paper of this paper is to summarise and review studies related to the energy management concept in buildings, using ANNs. The structure of the paper is to review studies related to the energy management and prediction in buildings through ANNs and summarize the review and a presentation of an ANN structure that will be developed and implemented by the authors, in the future.

Dr. Mandal published a paper entitled "Electricity Price and Load Short-Term Forecasting Using Artificial Neural Networks" [https://www.degruyter.com/view/j/ijeeps.2006.7.4/ijeeps.2006.7.4.1360/ijeeps.2006.7.4.1360.xml](https://www.degruyter.com/view/j/ijeeps.2006.7.4/ijeeps.2006.7.4.1360/ijeeps.2006.7.4.1360.xml). In this paper, Dr. Mandal discusses the price of electricity and the load in short-term forcasting using artificial neural networks. His paper presents an approach for forecasting short-term electricity price and load using an artificial neural network technique. The described approach uses the three-layered artificial neural network network with back-propagation. The data was acquired from the deregulated Victorian power system, publicly available, and used for training and testing the artificial neural network. The artificial neural network approach based on similarity technique has been proposed according to which the load and price curves are forecasted by using the information of the days being similar to that of the forecast day. To select similar days, a Euclidean norm with weighted factors was used. Two different artificial neural network models, one for load forecasting and another for price forecasting, were been proposed. Test results show that average price and load MAPEs for the year 2003 by using the artificial neural network approach are obtained as 14.29% and 0.95%, respectively. MAPE values obtained from the price and load forecasting results confirmed considerable value of the artificial neural network based approach in forecasting short-term electricity prices and loads.

Dr. Mandal published a paper entitled "Forecasting Power Output of Solar Photovoltaic System Using Wavelet Transform and Artificial Intelligence Techniques" [https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050912006710](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050912006710). In this paper, Dr. Mandal discusses forecasting the power output of solar photovoltaic systems using wavelet transforms and artificial intelligence techniques. He begins by talking about solar technology saying with increased penetration of solar as a variable energy resource, solar photovoltaic power production is rapidly increasing into large-scale power industries. Unexpected variations of their power output may increase the operating costs of the power system since power output of solar photovoltaic systems depends critically on the weather. Also, a major barrier in integrating this viable energy resource into the grid is its unpredictability. Since steady output cannot be guaranteed at any particular time it is difficult to rely heavily on photovoltaic power. This biases power utilities against using solar photovoltaic power since the planning and overall balancing of the grid becomes very challenging. Developing a reliable algorithm that can minimize the errors associated with forecasting the near future solar photovoltaic power generation is extremely beneficial for efficiently integrating viable energy resource into the grid. Solar photovoltaic power forecasting can play a key role in tackling these challenges. In the paper, Dr. Mandal presents one-hour-ahead power output forecasting of a solar photovoltaic system using a combination of wavelet transform and artificial intelligence techniques by incorporating the interactions of solar photovoltaic system with solar radiation and temperature data. In the proposed method, the wavelet transform is applied to have a significant impact on ill-behaved solar photovoltaic power time-series data, and artificial intelligence techniques capture the nonlinear solar photovoltaic fluctuation in a better way.
