---
title: 'Dr. Rakesh Kundal'
author: Philip Nelson
date: 25th September 2019
---

Dr. Kundal's major research areas are bioinformatics.

Dr. Kundal's research group is or has been working on the following project:

* Host-Pathogen Interaction

I liked the research about host-pathogen interaction. I though it was fascinating that we can use computer simulations to analyze which proteins in a pathogen will interact with which proteins in a host. The amount of time and monetary resources that this can save incredible.

Two researchers in the filed of bioinformatics are Dr. Sungroh Yoon at Seol National University and Dr. Johannes Söding at the Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen.

Dr. Sungroh Yoon published a paper entitled "Deep learning in bioinformatics" [https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/18/5/851/2562808](https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/18/5/851/2562808). In this paper, Dr. Sungroh and his team discuss the implications and applications of machine learning in an era of big data and bioengineering. They cite the accomplishments of companies such as IBM's Watson for Oncology and Google's DeepMind Health. With such great accomplishments of machine learning in the biomedical field, Dr. Sungroh says, "Certainly, bioinformatics can also benefit from deep learning, splice junctions can be discovered from DNA sequences, finger joints can be recognized from X-ray images, lapses can be detected from electroencephalography (EEG) signals, and so on. He discussed relevant technologies and methods for developing machine learning models such as deep learning libraries: Caffe, Neon, TensorFlow, Theano, and Torch, Deep, Convolutional, and Recurrent neural networks. Then he discusses the areas that machine learning can be applied in bioinformatics. Dr. Sungroh says that deep learning is very promising but is not a "silver bullet". The are many hurdles yet to overcome and issues with imbalanced data, interpretation of deep learning results and selection of appropriate architectures and hyperparameters. More study is required but I believe that he will be involved.

Tr. Sungroh Yoon published a paper entitled "Deep learning improves prediction of CRISPR–Cpf1 guide RNA activity" [https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.4061](https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.4061). In this paper, Dr. Sungroh and his team present algorithms to predict the activity of AsCpf1 guide RNAs. The team had previously reported a high throughput method for evaluating Cpf1 activity in human cells, however the original program was based on conventional machine learning trained on a medium scale, 1251 sequences, data set. In the new program, a large scale data set, 16292 sequences, was used to train a neural network machine learning program. They composed an end-to-end deep learning framework based on convolutional neural network and performed cross validation with a portion of the original data set. As the size of training data for cross validation increased, the Spearman correlation from Seq-deepCpf1 steadily increased up to 0.75. When these results are compared to conventional state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms for Cas9 activity prediction the Spearman correlation of Seq-deepCpf1 in the cross-validation was significantly higher.

Dr. Söding published a paper entitled "Fast, scalable generation of high‐quality protein multiple sequence alignments using Clustal Omega" [https://www.embopress.org/doi/full/10.1038/msb.2011.75](https://www.embopress.org/doi/full/10.1038/msb.2011.75). Dr. Söding begins by describing the problem of multiple sequence alignment. It is a fundamental piece of many analysis methods and is often computed using progressive alignment heuristics. These heuristic methods are starting to become a bottleneck in these analysis pipelines when applied to larger datasets. To overcome this issue, some pipelines are sacrificing quality to handle the larger datasets while others continue to produce high fidelity results but scale poorly. Dr. Söding and his team describe a new program they call Clustal Omega which can align any number of protein sequences quickly with accurate results. Clustal Omega outperforms other packages in metrics of speed and correctness. It also has new features for adding sequences and taking advantage of information in existing alignments which allows for the taking advantage of the vast amount of precomputed information in public databases.

Dr. Söding published a paper entitled "A Completely Reimplemented MPI Bioinformatics Toolkit with a New HHpred Server at its Core" [https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283617305879](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283617305879). In this paper, Dr. Söding describes an online toolkit called the MPI Bioinformatics Toolkit that he had developed in 2005. It is a one-stop web service for protein bioinformatics analysis. The toolkit had been adopted by researchers and up until its replacement, it had served 2.5 million queries! However, with more and more researchers wanting to process increasingly larger quantities of data, the toolkit was not keeping up with demand. So Dr. Söding and his team completely reimplemented the MPI Bioinformatics Toolkit in order to extend its functionality and increase its ability to handle the current and future load. The new toolkit uses scalable technologies to help accommodate the load and the toolkit received a face lift with a new and intuitive user interface. Along with new hardware and server software, new tools were added to the toolkit in order to continue expanding its functionality.
