---
title: |
  | Research Paper Report
  | A Ride-Matching Strategy For Large Scale Dynamic Ridesharing Services Based on Polar Coordinates
author: Philip Nelson
date: 7th December 2019
geometry:
- left=1.5in
- right=1.5in
---

This paper explores the problem of ride-share matching for large scale dynamic ride-sharing services. It studies how to pool multiple ride-share trip requests in real time under an uncertain environment. This problem is interesting because it can help reduce the cost of rides compared to single rider services. A solution to this problem would also help reduce, somewhat, congestion in big cities and carbon emissions. This more echo friendly approach to transportation is also popular amongst menials and is the business model for ride-sharing apps Carma Carpooling, Sidecar, Zimride and many others. Creating efficient algorithms to match up drivers and riders benefits all of the aforementioned beneficiaries.

*The assumptions made by the authors.*

The researchers name their approach to improving upon ride-share matching Polar Coordinates based Ride-Matching (PCRM). They start by describing related work done in this field. Some previous technologies used are spatio-temporal indexes to store passenger and driver information. This allows for faster matches with the trade off of extra computational resources to keep the information up to date. Another structure used to tackle this problem is a kinetic tree that stores all possible routes in an efficient way and improves searching for the best route at any time with the trade off of requiring passengers to input time constraints. Along with these data structures, many search techniques have been used in previous works. A technique called 2-opt perturbation heuristic in which the route neighborhood is adapted to maximize passenger satisfaction. A genetic algorithm was applied in another paper to improve the average serving rate and reduce the total traveling distance of vehicles. Another used local search to look for suboptimal routes so that improving the serving rate and reducing the distance could be satisfied. The shortcomings of these papers was that the algorithms failed to make fast enough responses to passengers for real time usage. Along with these, six other previous works were cited. 

To address limitations of previous works, the authors created a Unified Index (UI) which estimates the performance of dynamic ride sharing services by a parameterized and objective function. The optimizing of this function does not require riders to constrain their trip which leaves them free to simply supply their destination. They also propose a Polar-Coordinate based Ride-Matching strategy in order gather multiple riders into a single vehicle. To test their methods, they used a large dataset of New York City riders and were able to show that 38% of the travel distance can be saved with nearly 100% of travels serviced while only spending 3.8 more minutes on average en route.

Four figures were presented in the paper and one table. The first figure is a depiction of how spatially controlled zones are used in two phases of the PCRM algorithm. First is the source-side ride-matching and second is the destination-side ride-matching. Fig. 1 helped visualize how the algorithm chooses riders to add to the ride-share route. Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 visualize how changing parameters of the PCRM algorithm affect the inconvenient index (ICI), mileage saving index (MSI), serving ability index (SAI), and the unified index (UI). These figures help show which parameter values resulted in optimal algorithm performance. The final figure, Fig. 4 is a comparison of the PCRM algorithm versus two other algorithms: data driven method (DDM), and the online greedy method (OG). The figure is comprised of four bar graphs which compare the UI, SAI, MSI, and ICI indices at different times of day for each algorithm. The figure clearly shows PCRM out performs the other two algorithms in UI, SAI, and MSI during the majority of times of the day. 

The PCRM approach presented in the paper seems to be an improvement over previous methods. The researchers created a variety of metrics on which they were able to optimize their algorithm for user satisfaction and use those same metrics to compare their approach to other existing ones. From their trial using historical data in NYC, it seems that their algorithm is successful in providing ride-share matching. However, the test they performed is not totally convincing. One short coming to their evaluation is the time period over which they tested the PCRM algorithm, 6pm to 12am (midnight). I would like to have seen the algorithm work over a 24 hour period to show that it is superior over all.

I think that this paper and its method were well executed. I would like to see a more comprehensive test performed on the algorithm during a 24 hour period. The researchers used a novel approach and it appears to be successful. This approach could potentially be used to deliver packages.
