---
title: |
  | Research Paper Report
  | Separation of Syntax and Problem Solving in Introductory Computer Programming
author: Philip Nelson
date: 12th October 2019
geometry:
- left=1.5in
- right=1.5in
---

In the paper entitled "Separation of Syntax and Problem Solving in Introductory Computer Programming" by John M. Edwards et al. work to solve one of the major problems that plague entry level Computer Science (CS) students taking courses such as Introductory Computer Programming (CS1) which is learning programming language syntax. Learning the rigid and unforgiving syntax of a computer programming language can be extremely frustrating to CS students as this barrier impedes their ability to master the problem solving techniques that CS1 courses often identify as their primary goal. Difficulties in learning syntax contribute to high failure rates in CS1 courses of around 32%.

Syntax has been identified in other research as the cause of many struggles by comparing two groups of students, one learning a traditional programming language and another learning a block-based language such as Scratch. While learning the block-based language, students showed improved learning and attitude toward programming. However when they transitioned to a traditional programming language, their attitude and confidence reverted to match those in the control group. Solving this problem would help CS1 students overcome a major barrier to their learning and allow them to focus on the more important topic problem solving.

Dr. Edwards et al. present their solution under the claim that programming language syntax is belongs in the lower levels of Bloom's Taxonomy (knowledge, comprehension, and application) while problem solving using a programming language belongs in higher levels (analysis and synthesis). Under this assumption, a student must overcome and learn the syntax of a programming language before they will succeed in problem solving. It also means that the method of mastering syntax is different from the method of mastering problem solving.

To address and help to solve the issue of syntax learning, Dr. Edwards and his team present a piece of software called __Phanon__ to support their study and curriculum design. Their curriculum revolves around and idea called mechanics exercises. These exercises aim to teach students the syntax, or mechanics, of a language through example. Two additional pedagogical devices they explore are smaller, higher-frequency problem solving projects and active learning through pair programming.

Dr. Edwards and his group conducted a small scale preliminary study with sections of CS1 at their university. The curriculum was presented as follows. Smaller programming projects are assigned to the students each class day. A student may not start a project unless they have completed the mechanics exercises for the day. At the beginning of class each student who has completed the exercises is assigned a random partner with whom to pair program the assigned project. While the students work together, the classroom instructor answers questions individually as needed. If the project is not completed by the end of class students can either finish on their own or meet again as pairs outside of class to finish together. One project per week is assigned and completed individually. Projects are an even mix of turtle graphics-based problems and text-only problems. Typical projects include drawing geometric shapes and computing statistical measures on numbers input by the user.

Dr. Edwards measured students’ perceived value, project time, project scores, total time spent on the course, and exam results. The results of the pilot study were consistent with the hypothesis that the test section would yield improved student outcomes, with the exception of project and exam scores, which had no measurable difference between the test and control groups. Box plots of project scores, midterm exam results, time spent on projects, total time spent on the course, post-project challenge survey, and post-project frustration survey are used to display the results of the study. A p-value to measure statistical significance is used to quantitatively measure the results. 

From the results, Dr. Edwards was able to identify that students in the test group were spending more time overall on the course due to the Phanon exercises, however, they reported less perceived frustration during programming assignments and lower perceived difficulty of the programming assignments. The control group was also seen to take longer on programming assignments, likely not because they were spending longer to devise an adequate solution to the problem, but because they were struggling to express their solution in the programming language syntax. Although test performance was not seen to improve, the other improvements are already a huge benefit to students taking on a challenging course such as CS1.

The study performed by Dr. Edwards et al. was limited in scale. As it was only a preliminary study, it lacked the involvement of a large number of participants. Although the results are promising, further study is required. 

I found the paper to be very interesting and extremely promising. I believe lowering the barrier to entry in computer science through better methods of teaching programming language syntax is very important for CS education. I have not heard of a technique such as the one presented being used before and from the related research cited in the paper, it seems that this curriculum is well based in former research.

I am sure that this technique is not unique to computer science. Even The name __Phanon__ was inspired by the Hanon Exercise for piano, ie. Programming Hanon or Phanon. It is clear that this is already used in other disciplines and I am confident there are more that could benefit from a mechanics exercises approach to learning concepts from the lower levels of Bloom's Taxonomy. I hope that we can see this research continued and implemented with success for CS1 students.
